Policy Requirements (#646)
openmobilityfoundation/mobility-data-specification: policy/README.md

### Geographies

**Depreciated:** see the new [Geography API](/geography#transition-from-policy) to understand the transisiton away from this endpoint, and how to support both in a MDS 1.x.0 release.

Endpoint: `/geographies/{id}`  
Method: `GET`  
`data` Payload: `{ geographies: [] }`, an array of GeoJSON `Feature` objects that follow the schema [outlined here](#geography) or in [Geography](/geography#general-information).

#### Query Parameters

| Name         | Type      | Required / Optional | Description                                    |
| ------------ | --------- | --- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| `id`         | UUID      | Optional    | If provided, returns one [Geography](/geography#general-information) object with the matching UUID; default is to return all geography objects.               |

[Top][toc]

### Requirements

Endpoint: `/requirements/`  
Method: `GET`  
`data` Payload: `{ requirements: [] }`, JSON objects that follow the schema [outlined here](#requirement).
[Beta feature](/general-information.md#beta-features): *Yes (as of 1.2.0)*.

> See [Policy Requierment Examples](/policy/examples/requirements.md) for how this can be implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Policy Requirement Examples](/policy/examples/requirements.md) for how this can be implemented.
```

Author: Got it, thank you!

`provider_id` is an implicit parameter and will be encoded in the authentication mechanism, or a complete list of policies should be produced. If the Agency decides that Provider-specific policy documents should not be shared with other Providers (e.g. punitive policy in response to violations), an Agency should filter policy objects before serving them via this endpoint.

### Geographies

> **Deprecated:** see the new [Geography API](/geography#transition-from-policy) to understand the transistion away from this endpoint, and how to support both in a MDS 1.x.0 release.

Reviewer 2: typo: `transition`

Author: Fixed, thank you.

### Geography

> **Depreciated:** see the new [Geography API](/geography#transition-from-policy) to understand the transisiton away from this endpoint, and how to support both in a MDS 1.x.0 release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Deprecated:** see the new [Geography API](/geography#transition-from-policy) to understand the transition away from this endpoint, and how to support both in a MDS 1.x.0 release.
```

Author: Corrected, thanks!

The internal mechanics of ordering are up to the Policy editing and hosting software.

[Top][toc]

### Requirement

> The agency Policy Requirement file ennumerates all of the parts of MDS that an agency requires from providers, including APIs, endpoints, and optional fields, as well as information for providers about the APIs the agency is hosting. The requirements are specific to the needs and use cases of each agency, and ensures there is clarity on what data is being asked for in operating policy documents from providers, reducing the burden on both. This also allows additional public transparency and accountability around data requirements from agencies, and encourages privacy by allowing agencies to ask for only the data they need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The agency Policy Requirement file enumerates all of the parts of MDS that an agency requires from providers, including APIs, endpoints, and optional fields, as well as information for providers about the APIs the agency is hosting. The requirements are specific to the needs and use cases of each agency, and ensure there is clarity on what data is being asked for in operating policy documents from providers, reducing the burden on both. This also allows additional public transparency and accountability around data requirements from agencies, and encourages privacy by allowing agencies to ask for only the data they need.
```

Author: Thank you for the catches. Fixed!

> This endpoint it not authenicated (ie. public), and allows the discovery of other public APIs like Geography, Policy, and Jurisdiction. The agency can host this as a file or API on their servers, on a third party server, or the OMF can host on behalf of an agency in the [agency requirements repo](#). See this [hosting guidance document](#) for more information.  This requirements file can be [referenced directly](https://github.com/openmobilityfoundation/governance/blob/main/technical/OMF-MDS-Policy-Language-Guidance.md) in an agency's operating permit/policy document when discussing program data requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint is not authenticated (ie. public), and allows the discovery of other public APIs like Geography, Policy, and Jurisdiction. The agency can host this as a file or API on their servers, on a third party server, or the OMF can host on behalf of an agency in the [agency requirements repo](#). See this [hosting guidance document](#) for more information.  This requirements file can be [referenced directly](https://github.com/openmobilityfoundation/governance/blob/main/technical/OMF-MDS-Policy-Language-Guidance.md) in an agency's operating permit/policy document when discussing program data requirements.
```

Author: Updated thank you!

      "version" : "[MDS VERSION NUMBER]",
      "provider_ids": [
        // provider id array
      ],
      "mds_apis": [
        {
          "api_name" : "[MDS API]": {
            // MDS endpoints, urls, optional fields
          }
        },
        // other MDS APIs per the "Requirement MDS APIs" section
      ]
    }, 
    // other MDS versions per the "Requriement MDS Version" section
  }
}
```
[Top][toc]

#### Requirement Metadata

Contains metadata applicable to the agency and at the top of its [Requirement](#requirement) data feed in the `metadata` section. 

| Name                         | Type            | Required / Optional | Description              |
| ---------------------------- | --------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `mds_release`                | text            | Required | Release of MDS that the requirements data feed aligns to, based on official MDS releases. E.g. "1.2.0" |
| `version`                    | integer         | Required | Version of this file. Increment 1 with each modification. E.g. "3" |
| `last_updated`               | [timestamp][ts] | Required | When this file `version` was last updated. E.g. "1611958740" |

> | `max_update_frequency`       | integer         | Required | The expected maximum frequency with which this file could be updated. E.g. "P1D" |

Reviewer 3: `P1D` is not an integer

Author: Yes, updated, thanks!

> | `omf_review`                 | Enum            | Required | yes/no. Was this file reviewed by OMF Staff for accuracy? E.g. "yes" |

Reviewer 2: Sorry if I'm misunderstanding the original impetus for this, and I know that this field is being removed for now, but would have some kind of official OMF-sanctioned validation tool for the requirements endpoint payload suffice instead?

Author: Yes that would also work, but building and maintaining a tool would be a much bigger undertaking, and may still have the same implications here, eg. "this feed was validated by the OMF tool", which could still be a liability issue. Not sure so removing for now. Instead it could just be a "validator" text field that says who or what validated the feed, like 'Ride Report' or 'Populus' or 'OMF Validator', etc.

Author: So we can add a 'feed_validator' text field which would just be the free form name of the organization that validated the tool. No need to enumerate values.  And a second 'feed_validator_date' field that is the ISO date (eg 2021-06-02) of when the most recent validation was done, useful to compare the last updated date of the feed to this date.

Author: It think we are going to leave this off for the initial release. I'd like to wait and see what sort of adoption we get before building validating tools.

| `omf_review_date`            | [timestamp][ts] | Optional | If `omf_review`, add timestamp. E.g. "1611958749" |
| `agency_uuid`                | UUID            | Required | UUID of the agency this file applies to. Must come from [agencies.csv](/agencies.csv) file. E.g. "737a9c62-c0cb-4c93-be43-271d21b784b5" |
| `agency_name`                | text            | Required | Name of the agency this file applies to. E.g. "Louisville Metro" |
| `agency_time_zone`           | text            | Required | Timezone used for dates and times across all MDS endpoints. E.g. "America/New_York" |

> | `agency_currency`            | text            | Required | Currency used for all monetary values across all MDS endpoints. E.g. "USD" |

Reviewer 2: Feels a bit superfluous since `currency` is specified in each policy, and I don't think it's used anywhere else.

Author: I think it's good for an agency to specify the currency it wants here at a high level so it's clear, in case elsewhere in the spec a value is left off.

| `agency_policy_website_url`  | URL             | Required | URL of the agency's transportation policy page. E.g. "https://www.cityname.gov/transporation/shared-devices.htm" |
| `agency_policy_document_url` | URL             | Optional | URL of the agency's operating permit rules that mention data requirements. E.g. "https://www.cityname.gov/mds_data_policy.pdf" |

> | `gbfs_required`              | Enum            | Required | yes/no. Is public GBFS required explicitly by providers? E.g. "yes" |

Reviewer 3: why not `boolean`?

Author: Not sure what's best. I don't think we have any boolean fields in MDS so this would be the first.  Could go 0/1 or yes/no. We should talk about it.

Reviewer 4: Definitely would prefer a boolean value here. JSON supports `true`/`false`, so no need to come up with alternate schemes.

Author: Changed to boolean in the spec and examples

```jsonc
// ...  
  "mds_versions": [
    {
      "version" : "[MDS VERSION NUMBER]",
      "provider_ids": [
        "[PROVIDER UUID]",
        "[PROVIDER UUID]"
      ],
      "mds_apis" [
        {
          // ...
        },
        // other MDS APIs
      ]
    }
  ]
// ...
```

| Name                         | Type           | Required / Optional | Description              | 
| ---------------------------- | -------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------- | 
| `version`                    | text           | Required | Version number of an official MDS release | 
| `provider_ids`               | UUID[]         | Required | Array of providers that apply to this part of the requirements | 

[Top][toc]

#### Requirement MDS APIs

> For each combination of MDS version and provider list, you can specify the MDS APIs, endpoints, and optional fields that are required per your agency's policy. This is an array within the [Requirement MDS Version](#requirement-mds-version) `mds_apis` section in the [Requirement](#requirement) data feed.

Reviewer 3: I think we will want support for `modes` and some SLA fields such as latency.  E.g. "/events must arrive within 30 seconds."

Author: I think SLA's and what they entail may come in a the next version of this. Unless you have some specific proposals that we can look at and agree on. I see a lot of variability here that could be challenging.

But your mention of modes makes me think maybe modes could be listed for each Release/Provider/state/end combination too, so different modes could apply to the same provider, or different MDS versions...

Author: Thinking about the SLA some more... Maybe there could be a field for 'expected_latency' at the endpoint level which specified an ISO interval that is the minimum expected time that an agency would like to get the data. Eg 5 minutes if they want near real time data, but could be 24 hours if they only have use cases that require it to be updated once per day? Not sure how that sits with certain endpoint latency as required in the spec already, and if this would be allowed to override that.

Author: I think SLA should wait for a future version of this, so let's put a pin in it.  I did add `vehicle_types` [here](https://github.com/openmobilityfoundation/mobility-data-specification/commit/6c6a89d7ed24f220eaa6607caf0efcd7a853aa4e) so you can optionally specify an array of types that apply to the specific version and providers in question. Does this solve your mode idea?

| `programs`                   | Array           | Required | Array of [Requirement Programs](#requirement-programs) data. | 
| `required_data_specs`        | Array           | Required | Array of [Requirement Data Specs](#requirement-data-specs) data. | 
| `required_apis`              | Array           | Required | Array of [Requirement APIs](#requirement-apis) data. | 

[Top][toc]

#### Requirement Metadata

Contains metadata applicable to the agency and at the top of its [Requirement](#requirement) data feed in the `metadata` section. 

```jsonc
{
  "metadata": {
    "mds_release": "[TEXT]",
    "version": "[INTEGER]",
    "last_updated": "[TIMESTAMP]",
    "max_update_interval": "[DURATION]",
    "agency_uuid": "[UUID]",
    "agency_name": "[TEXT]",
    "agency_timezone": "[TIMEZONE]",
    "agency_language": "[TEXT]",
    "agency_currency": "[TEXT]",
    "agency_website_url": "[URL]"
    "url": "[URL]"
  },
  "mds_versions" [ 
    // Requirement MDS Versions
  ]
}
```

| Name                         | Type            | Required / Optional | Description              |
| ---------------------------- | --------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------- |

> | `mds_release`                | text            | Required | Release of MDS that the **requirements data feed** aligns to, based on official MDS releases. E.g. "1.2.0" |

Reviewer 5: would suggest mds_requirements_version or something that makes it more clear that this applies to the requirements file itself, not the APIs it is describing

Author: Yes good point on clarifying the intent of this version of this file. Will adjust.

Author: Updated to 'file_version' which I think is clear.

**Agency Endpoints** - Specific to the `available_apis` array 

| Name                 | Type  | Required/Optional | Description                | 
| -------------------- | ----- | -------- | ----------------------------------- | 
| `available_endpoints`| Array | Required | Array of endpoints provided by the agency. At least one is required. | 
| `url`                | URL   | Optional | Location of API endpoint url. Required if the API is unauthenticated and public, optional if endpoint is authenticated and private. E.g. "https://mds.cityname.gov/geographies/geography/1.1.0"  | 
| `available_fields`   | Array | Optional | Array of optional field names provided by the agency. Can be omitted if none are required. Use dot notation for nested fields. See **special notes** below. | 

**Special notes about `required_fields`.** 

- All fields marked 'Required' in MDS are still included by default and should not be enumerated in `required_fields`. They are not affected by the Requirements endpoint.
- Fields in MDS marked 'Required if available' are still returned if available, and are not affected by the Requirements endpoint.

> - To reference fileds that are lower in a heirarchy, use [dot separated notation](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/18/adjsn/simple-dot-notation-access-to-json-data.html#GUID-7249417B-A337-4854-8040-192D5CEFD576), where a dot between field names represents one nested level deeper into the data structure. E.g. 'gps.heading' or 'features.properties.rules.vehicle_type_id'.

Reviewer 2: `fields`

Author: Fixed. Thanks for finding typos!

| -------------------- | ----- | -------- | ----------------------------------- | 
| `api_name`           | Text  | Required | Name of the applicable API required. At least one API is required. APIs not listed will not be available to the agency. E.g. for MDS: 'provider', or 'agency'. For GBFS, this field is omitted since GBFS starts at the `endpoint` level. | 
| `endpoint_name`      | Text  | Required | Name of the required endpoint under the API. At least one endpoint is required. E.g. for MDS 'provider': 'trips' | 

**Provider Endpoints** - Specific to the `required_apis` array 

| Name                 | Type  | Required/Optional | Description                | 
| -------------------- | ----- | -------- | ----------------------------------- | 
| `required_endpoints` | Array | Required | Array of optional endpoints required by the agency. At least one is required. Endpoints not listed will not be available to the agency. | 
| `required_fields`    | Array | Optional | Array of optional field names required by the agency. Can be omitted if no optional fields are required. Use dot notation for nested fields. See **special notes** below. | 

> | `disallowed_fields`  | Array | Optional | Array of optional field names who's values are to be returned by the agency as `null`, even if required in MDS. Use dot notation for nested fields. See **special notes** below. | 

Author: My main concern with removing the required field itself is that any schema validation will then fail, since the field is required. 

Of course, if there is also validation on the value of that field, then that would fail as well. So maybe it's not an issue per se. Language may have to be added to say that schema validations may fail if required fields are removed.

> | `disallowed_fields`  | Array | Optional | Array of optional field names who's values are to be returned by the agency as `null`, even if required in MDS. Use dot notation for nested fields. See **special notes** below. | 

Reviewer 5: Yep, I think that's a good path. I think maybe the validation _should_ fail - we're explicitly allowing Agencies to break the spec by disallowing required fields.

> | `disallowed_fields`  | Array | Optional | Array of optional field names who's values are to be returned by the agency as `null`, even if required in MDS. Use dot notation for nested fields. See **special notes** below. | 

Reviewer 6: I think that generally in MDS we've considered `null` equivalent to `undefined` by convention (I swear that there was some issue for this at one point), so we should make sure that this aligns. In a lot of relational databases, `undefined` is _persisted_ as `null`, so the semantic difference between "this was never available" versus "this was omitted when it was sent" is lost anyways.

> | `disallowed_fields`  | Array | Optional | Array of optional field names who's values are to be returned by the agency as `null`, even if required in MDS. Use dot notation for nested fields. See **special notes** below. | 

Author: I've made an update in this [commit](https://github.com/openmobilityfoundation/mobility-data-specification/commit/648b2192b4b6eee9ab9b013c1e2f0a23ba68e669#diff-5dbb467da8c3ceb340b4c471496e28b63ed45d1ee3e15ceed7c44c3b88340720). Let me know what you think.

> | `disallowed_fields`  | Array | Optional | Array of optional field names who's values are to be returned by the agency as `null`, even if required in MDS. Use dot notation for nested fields. See **special notes** below. | 

Reviewer 5: lgtm!
